Add front-end best practices doc (#824)
strata-org/Strata: docs/frontend_guide.md

## Why This Matters

Building a correct front-end is challenging. It requires a deep understanding of both your source language's semantics and the Strata IR you are targeting. Poor translation choices can lead to unsound verification results or make certain properties impossible to verify. This guide distills lessons learned from existing implementations to help you avoid common pitfalls and build robust, maintainable front ends.

## Getting Started

The guide consists of answers to several key questions, organized to support both linear reading and targeted references. New developers should start with the architecture overview and core translation concepts before diving into implementation details. Experienced developers can jump directly to specific sections addressing their immediate needs.

## Architecture & Design

> ### What are the main components of a Strata front-end?

Reviewer: I would specify the relevant languages:
- Source language. The language for which you want to build verification.
- Strata intermediate verification language. You will pick an existing Strata IVL that is most similar to the source language.
- Strata input language. Take the reference compiler of your source language and use its phases as long as they move towards the Strata IVL. The program that remains after these phases is the lowered source language. In case you have no compiler passes to re-use, which might be the case for highly dynamic languages like Python, this will be the same as the source language.
- Reference compiler host language. This is the language in which the reference compiler or parser is defined.

And then the components:
- Strata input language definition. Defined using Strata's language definition library.
- Generated from the Strata input language definition:
  - Input language AST type definition in the compiler host language
  - Serialization from the above to Ion
  - Deserialization from Ion to the Strata input language AST in Lean
- Strata client. Compiles the source language to the Strata input language, built on top of the reference compiler and in the reference compiler host language.
- Strata input language compiler. Mapping of the Strata input language to the relevant Strata IVL, built in Lean.

A Strata front end parses text written in a source language and translates it to a representation in a Strata dialect. To do this, it needs several components:

- **A parser or compiler front-end for the source language.** We typically recommend that this be the standard parser for the source language, perhaps the one used by a standard production compiler, interpreter, or analyzer for that language, to ensure that it accurately captures the structure of all source programs of interest and can be maintained as easily as possible as the language evolves. For complex languages, leveraging an existing compiler's early passes (name resolution, type inference, desugaring) is recommended, as it avoids reconstructing these in Lean. This will often be implemented in the source language itself, or at the very least in a language different than Lean, the language used to implement Strata.

> - **Data structures to represent the target Strata dialect (either an existing one like Laurel, or a new one you define for your source language).** Although it would be possible to traverse the AST of the source language and directly generate the textual or binary representation of a Strata dialect, doing so would involve complex code that is difficult to understand and audit. So, we recommend an AST-to-AST translation from the source language to a Strata dialect. AST representations for Strata dialects are available in Java, Lean, and Python, generated from a high-level dialect description. If your source language toolchain uses a different language, contact the Strata team to discuss adding support for it, or use the Ion serialization format directly. See the [Implementation Guide](#what-is-the-api-for-constructing-a-dialects-ast-programmatically) for details on the Dialect Definition Mechanism (DDM) that generates these ASTs.

Reviewer: > **Data structures to represent the target Strata dialect (either an existing one like Laurel, or a new one you define for your source language).** Although it would be possible to traverse the AST of the source language and directly generate the textual or binary representation of a Strata dialect, doing so would involve complex code that is difficult to understand and audit. So, we recommend an AST-to-AST translation from the source language to a Strata dialect. AST representations for Strata dialects are available in Java, Lean, and Python, generated from a high-level dialect description. If your source language toolchain uses a different language, contact the Strata team to discuss adding support for it, or use the Ion serialization format directly. See the [Implementation Guide](#what-is-the-api-for-constructing-a-dialects-ast-programmatically) for details on the Dialect Definition Mechanism (DDM) that generates these ASTs.

===>

- **A Strata input language.** We recommend that you define a fresh Strata input language that matches the structure the source language has after it has been parsed and potentially simplified by a reference compiler. The input language is defined using Strata's language definition mechanism (DDM). See the [Implementation Guide](#what-is-the-api-for-constructing-a-dialects-ast-programmatically) for details on the Dialect Definition Mechanism (DDM).

- **Extension of the reference compiler.** From the input language definition, Strata can generate equivalent types in other languages, together with a serializer and deserializer. You will build on top of the reference compiler to map the source program to the Strata input language defined in the compiler's language, and use the generated serializer to pass this program to Strata.
Integration support is available for Java, Python and Lean. If your source language toolchain uses a different language, contact the Strata team to discuss adding support for it, or use the Ion serialization format directly.

> - **Code to translate between the source language and the Strata dialect.** Given ASTs for both the source language and a Strata dialect, one component of the front end will need to traverse an instance of the former to produce an instance of the latter. This component is specific to each source language, and its complexity will depend on how different the chosen Strata dialect is from the source language. See the section on [choosing a target dialect](#what-are-the-existing-strata-dialects-which-strata-dialect-should-i-target) for guidance on this decision. It's possible for a Strata dialect to exactly mirror the structure of a source language, in which case this translation will be straightforward and mechanical (and possibly even auto-generated, as in the Python dialect described below). This is the recommended approach when feasible, as it keeps the external translation simple and moves the complexity of lowering the Strata dialect into verification friendly dialects like Strata Core into Lean where it can be shared and potentially verified.

Reviewer 2: Could comment on it being LLM-generated, as well.

### What are the semantics preservation requirements when translating to Strata?

Strata is intended to allow multiple analyses to be implemented for multiple source languages without requiring excessive duplication of effort. For this to be effective, a front end must capture the semantics of the original source as accurately as possible, so that whatever details an analysis might need are guaranteed to be available. Although the exact details of "as accurately as possible" depend on what details of each language are included in a formal semantics, a general rule of thumb would be to treat a Strata front end more like you would when implementing a compiler than you might when, say, implementing a narrowly-targeted static analysis tool. Strata aims to make its intermediate representations executable, which means translations should preserve enough detail for both analysis and execution — more than a typical compiler optimization pass would retain, but with the same attention to semantic fidelity.

> ### How should I handle metadata propagation?

Reviewer: Please define `metadata`. 

My impression is that we're defining metadata as anything that would not be used in our semantic definitions of the language, which would be similar as anything that would not be used in an interpreter for this language. Given that, source locations would not be metadata if they're part of error messages specified in the semantics/interpreter.

- **Conceptual understanding of the analyses you intend to perform** (helpful but not strictly required, and only to the extent that you intend to verify or analyze programs in the language you're adding). Knowing that `Assert` nodes become proof obligations, that loops require invariants for an SMT solver to reason about them, and that procedures need contracts helps you make sound translation choices. You do not need to understand the SMT encoding or the Core VCG internals to get started.

### What is the API for constructing a dialect's AST programmatically?

> The API has two layers: dialect definition and program construction. Both are provided by the `strata.base` Python module (see [`Tools/Python/strata/base.py`](https://github.com/strata-org/Strata/blob/main/Tools/Python/strata/base.py)).

Reviewer 2: These instructions are all Python-specific. Still very useful, but it'd be good to clarify.

**Step 3: Construct program AST nodes.** Walk the source language's native AST and emit `Operation` nodes. The key value types are `NumLit`, `StrLit`, `Ident`, `OptionArg`, and `Seq`. Every node can carry a `SourceRange(offset, end_offset)` via the `ann=` keyword argument, which propagates byte offsets through to verification error messages. The Python parser's `ast_to_arg` method in [`pythonast.py`](https://github.com/strata-org/Strata/blob/main/Tools/Python/strata/pythonast.py) is the canonical example of this dispatch.

**Step 4: Serialize.** The final result is a `Program` object to which you add the top-level `Operation` with `p.add(op)`, and then serialize with `p.write(output_path)`.

### How do I implement lowering passes between Strata dialects?

> A lowering pass is a set of mutually recursive functions that pattern-match on the source AST and construct target AST nodes. There is no framework or base class to inherit from. The two canonical examples are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A lowering pass is function or set of functions that pattern-match on the source AST and construct target AST nodes. There is no framework or base class to inherit from. The two canonical examples are:
```
